<h1>Why Call it “Deep Learning“?</h1>
<br/>
Why Not Just “Artificial Neural Networks“?
Geoffrey Hinton is a pioneer in the field of artificial neural networks and co-published the first paper on the backpropagation algorithm for training multilayer perceptron networks.

He may have started the introduction of the phrasing “deep” to describe the development of large artificial neural networks.

He co-authored a paper in 2006 titled “A Fast Learning Algorithm for Deep Belief Nets” in which they describe an approach to training “deep” (as in a many layered network) of restricted Boltzmann machines.

Using complementary priors, we derive a fast, greedy algorithm that can learn deep, directed belief networks one layer at a time, provided the top two layers form an undirected associative memory.

This paper and the related paper Geoff co-authored titled “Deep Boltzmann Machines” on an undirected deep network were well received by the community (now cited many hundreds of times) because they were successful examples of greedy layer-wise training of networks, allowing many more layers in feedforward networks.

In a co-authored article in Science titled “Reducing the Dimensionality of Data with Neural Networks” they stuck with the same description of “deep” to describe their approach to developing networks with many more layers than was previously typical.

We describe an effective way of initializing the weights that allows deep autoencoder networks to learn low-dimensional codes that work much better than principal components analysis as a tool to reduce the dimensionality of data.

In the same article, they make an interesting comment that meshes with Andrew Ng’s comment about the recent increase in compute power and access to large datasets that has unleashed the untapped capability of neural networks when used at larger scale.

It has been obvious since the 1980s that backpropagation through deep autoencoders would be very effective for nonlinear dimensionality reduction, provided that computers were fast enough, data sets were big enough, and the initial weights were close enough to a good solution. All three conditions are now satisfied.

In a talk to the Royal Society in 2016 titled “Deep Learning“, Geoff commented that Deep Belief Networks were the start of deep learning in 2006 and that the first successful application of this new wave of deep learning was to speech recognition in 2009 titled “Acoustic Modeling using Deep Belief Networks“, achieving state of the art results.

It was the results that made the speech recognition and the neural network communities take notice, the use “deep” as a differentiator on previous neural network techniques that probably resulted in the name change.

The descriptions of deep learning in the Royal Society talk are very backpropagation centric as you would expect. Interesting, he gives 4 reasons why backpropagation (read “deep learning”) did not take off last time around in the 1990s. The first two points match comments by Andrew Ng above about datasets being too small and computers being too slow.
